Luanti client
=============
extensions/luanti_client makes buildat_client talk to an unmodified Luanti
server: it does the client's side of Luanti's protocol.

    $ bin/buildat_client -m luanti_client

It asks for an address, a player name and a password, logs in, and shows the
terrain around the player with the server's own textures. Luanti 5.11.0 up to
5.17.0 -- protocol 46 up to 52 -- are what it speaks; every one of them
serializes mapblocks as version 29, which is the only version parsed here.
What changed inside that range and is handled: definitions and media are zlib
below protocol 48 and zstd from there on, the media announcement is a plain
list of names and base64 hashes below 48, an item's image carries an
animation only from 51 on, and the inventory is the rest of its packet below
52.
BUILDAT_LUANTI_ADDRESS sets the address the dialog starts with, which is what
scripted runs (-c) use. BUILDAT_LUANTI_FORCE_DAY keeps the world at midday
whatever the server's time is, for the same reason: a run of half a minute
cannot wait for morning. BUILDAT_LUANTI_FORCE_TIME pins the time of day
itself, as Luanti's 0...24000, which is how the sky at dawn or at night gets
looked at without waiting or asking the server for the privilege of setting
its clock. BUILDAT_LUANTI_NAME sets the player name the dialog
starts with, so that a test run does not fight a session of your own for the
same player.

Controls: the mouse looks, WASD walks, space jumps, ctrl sneaks, shift is
faster, 1 to 8 pick a hotbar slot, the left mouse button digs what is pointed
at and the right one places what is wielded, I opens the inventory, T says
something (a line starting with a slash is a command), K toggles flying, H
toggles going through walls, F1 hides the hotbar, the health bar and the
crosshair, F2 hides what has been said (which is in the top left corner under
those lines, where a Luanti game expects it: what a game draws of its own is
along the bottom), F5 hides the lines of detail in the corner, escape closes a form and then disconnects.
Flying and going through walls need the server to give the player the fly and
noclip privileges; without them its movement checks pull the player back.

The player is a box 0.6 nodes across and 1.75 tall whose bottom is the
position the server talks about, and it falls, jumps, walks into things and
slides along them. What it walks into is the collision boxes out of the node
definitions, turned the way the node's param2 says, so a slab is half a node
high and a stair is two steps; anything up to Luanti's step height of 0.6 is
walked onto without a jump and a whole node has to be jumped over, which is
what Luanti asks for as well. What the player collides with is
what the server says is walkable, and a node whose block has not arrived
counts as solid, so the player stands still rather than falling through a
world that has not loaded. The movement constants -- speeds, acceleration,
gravity -- are the ones the server sends in TOCLIENT_MOVEMENT.

Light: Luanti keeps two light values per node, the light it has when the sun
is up and the light it gets from light sources alone. Those are what buildat's
mesher calls skylight and lamplight, and it bakes them into the geometry's
vertex colours along with ambient occlusion and a per-face brightness. The
technique in res/VoxelUnlit.xml draws that: the texture
times the zone's ambient colour times how much of the sky the surface sees,
plus the lamplight. So the time of day is one colour on the zone and nothing
is meshed again when the sun moves, and a cave is dark with its torches lit.
It also discards texels below half alpha, which is what makes the holes in a
leaf or a pane of glass be holes.

On top of that, a voxel whose definition gives light gets a real light in the
scene -- the two dozen nearest the camera, each with a range and a brightness
from its light level, and an additive light pass in the technique for them to
reach the geometry. The colour is the average of the voxel's own first tile
with the brightest channel brought up to one, so a torch is warm, a redstone
torch is red and a soul torch is blue without anything here having to know
what any of them are. Luanti has one number for this and paints every source
the same; this is what the rendering latitude is for.

A node is drawn as a cube with its own six textures when its draw type is a
cube (normal, glasslike, allfaces, a liquid source), and as the quads of its
own shape when it is not: a node box, a plant, a torch, a sign, a rail, a
flowing liquid, or an .obj model. What is left is one grey placeholder cube --
a node whose model is in a format objmesh.lua does not read, and one whose
texture is a modifier expression texmod.lua does not reduce.

The network dialog of extension/network asks about the address the first time;
see doc/client_api.txt.

What is where
-------------
serialize.lua   Luanti's big-endian numbers and length-prefixed strings
connection.lua  The UDP transport: channels, reliable packets, acks, splits
srp.lua         The client half of the SRP-6a login, on buildat.bignum
client.lua      The commands: the login, the map blocks, and dispatch for the
                rest
nodedef.lua     NODEDEF: what a node id is called, how it is drawn, its tiles
media.lua       The server's media files, in cache/luanti_media/<server>/
player.lua      The player's box: the keys, gravity, and collision against
                the nodes
shapes.lua      Luanti's node shapes, as the quads a voxel definition takes
objmesh.lua     Wavefront .obj, as the quads a voxel's shape is made of
res/            What the client itself ships: the placeholder textures, and
                the shaders and techniques this world is drawn with. Urho3D
                finds them because share_path/extensions is a resource dir,
                and a technique names a shader with a path of its own so it
                does not have to live in the one shader directory
objects.lua     The things in the world that are not nodes: what the server
                says they are and where
itemdef.lua     ITEMDEF: what an item is, and what a tool can dig
inventory.lua   TOCLIENT_INVENTORY: what the player is carrying
hud.lua         The HUD the server describes, and the flags that turn this
                client's own off
sounds.lua      PLAY_SOUND and friends, and the sound groups a game's media
                falls into
formspec.lua    The elements of a formspec, and where they go
formspec_ui.lua A formspec on the screen, as Urho3D UI elements
texmod.lua      Luanti's texture modifier language, as compose_image()
                operations
world.lua       The scene: a node per map block, with buildat's voxel mesher
                on it, and the voxel registry the node definitions build
engine_test.lua Checks of the engine primitives, run at boot
init.lua        The connect dialog and the status screen

The engine side of this is nothing Luanti-specific: sockets (extension/network),
SHA-256 and bignum arithmetic (buildat.sha256, buildat.bignum).

Checks
------
    $ lua extensions/luanti_client/test.lua

covers serialize.lua, connection.lua, nodedef.lua, media.lua, player.lua,
texmod.lua, inventory.lua, formspec.lua and objects.lua without an engine: the packet framing, numbers including f32, reliable packets arriving
out of order or twice, acknowledgements, resending, splitting what is sent and
reassembling what arrives, the peer id handshake, a NODEDEF packet built the
way a server builds one and read back, which media names are usable as file
names, and the player's box against a world made of a function -- falling to
the ground, stopping at a wall, sliding along it, jumping onto a ledge,
sinking in water and swimming out, flying, and getting out of a node it ended
up inside, the texture modifier language -- what an expression parses to,
which files it needs, and which operations each modifier becomes -- and the
inventory -- quoted item names, empty slots, KeepList, and which tool
capabilities a dig goes by -- and formspecs: the elements, escaped fields,
nested containers, and the two coordinate systems -- and the active objects:
an object's initialization data and its properties, the positions that arrive
afterwards, and the messages this does not implement going past harmlessly.

    $ bin/buildat_client -m luanti_client

runs engine_test.lua at boot, which checks the engine primitives the extension
leans on: buildat.compress / buildat.decompress, buildat.pack_voxel_volume
and buildat.compose_image. The image checks compose PNGs and read them back
through Urho3D, so the blending, the eight symmetries, the scaling and the
colour arithmetic are checked pixel by pixel.

srp.lua has self_test(), which init.lua runs at boot; its vectors come from
util/srp_reference.py, which does SRP-6a separately in Python.

Both login paths have been run against a real Luanti server: registering a new
player (FIRST_SRP) and logging in as one the server knows (SRP), and the
terrain of that server's world has been on screen with its own textures.

How a session ends: escape leaves the world, and so does the server denying
access or the connection going away. A denial and the disconnection that
follows it arrive together -- the server sends TOCLIENT_ACCESS_DENIED and
closes -- and the denial is the one that gets shown; the reason codes have no
words on the wire, so the words come from Luanti's own client
(accessDeniedStrings in clientpackethandler.cpp). A server that says nothing
at all for twenty seconds counts as gone as well: a live one acknowledges the
position we send it several times a second, and without that rule a client
pointed at an address nothing answers would sit there resending its INIT.
Whatever the reason, everything this session put on the screen is taken back,
the reason goes in a dialog, and closing that dialog closes the client.

Keeping the frame rate while the world loads: the world is semi-infinite, so
blocks arrive for as long as the player walks and whatever loading costs is
paid during play. Two budgets keep a burst of them from being one long frame:
what the server sent is reassembled and acknowledged as it arrives but handed
to the command handlers for 4 ms a frame (the counters say how many commands
are waiting), and blocks are handed to the mesher for 4 ms a frame, nearest
first. One command and one block always get through, so nothing can starve.
What a block costs before the mesher's own thread sees it is on screen as
"us to hand over".

The counter line also says where the player is looking, in degrees down and
degrees round. A command sequence can only move the look by relative pixels
(mouse_move, 0.15 degrees each, pitch clamped to 89 either way), so aiming at
something reproducibly means saturating the pitch and then coming back a
counted number of pixels; the readout is what makes that checkable.

Loading: until the game's definitions and its media are in there is nothing
worth drawing -- a world of placeholders is not the game -- so a panel covers
the screen and says how far along it is, and the voxel registry is built with
50 ms of the frame rather than 4, because behind the panel there is nothing to
keep smooth. MineClone's 2500 voxel types are then one build of about a
second, and the whole cold load is the media transfer plus that.

Media: everything the server announces and the cache does not have is asked
for at once, which is what Luanti's own client does
(ClientMediaDownloader::startConventionalTransfers). A game's media is mostly
sounds, models and textures for things that are not nodes, so most of it is
never drawn -- MineClone announces 3400 files -- but working out which files
the definitions reach means walking every texture expression, and a file
discovered after the registry was built costs a whole build again. The bytes
are cheaper than the rebuilds: the registry is built once, when the
announcement has arrived and the files it named have. A file the server never
sends does not hold the rest back forever -- fifteen seconds with no media
arriving is enough -- and what the announcement did not cover is still asked
for when something wants to draw it.

An item that places a voxel is drawn as the little isometric cube Luanti
draws, when the voxel is a cube at all: the top tile and the two a viewer off
the +X +Z corner would see, each sheared onto a parallelogram by
compose_image's "shear", with the two sides darkened by asking for the tile
with a [multiply on it. A nodebox, a plant or a mesh keeps its flat top tile
instead -- what those look like is their own shape, and a cube would be a
worse lie. Luanti renders the node with a camera to get this picture; three
sheared tiles is what comes out of that without a render target, and it is
composed and cached on disk like every other composed texture. Rendering to a
texture is still the more general primitive and is on the list for whatever
needs a picture a shear cannot draw.

Texture modifiers: a texture name in a node definition is an expression --
"default_dirt.png^mcl_dirt_grass_shadow.png",
"mcl_core_glass.png^[multiply:red", "[combine:32x16:0,0=a.png:16,0=b.png".
texmod.lua reads Luanti's language for these and turns an expression into
buildat.compose_image() operations, which do the pixels and save a PNG beside
the server's own files under a hash of the expression; the atlas then takes it
by that name. A nested expression -- a group in parentheses, or one of
[combine's pieces -- is composed on its own first and referred to by the name
it was written under, so nothing has to hold an image.

What is implemented: chaining with "^", grouping with "(...)", [combine,
[fill, [colorize, [multiply, [screen, [opacity, [brighten, [noalpha, [hsl,
[transform, [resize, [mask, [verticalframe, [sheet, [lowpart, [makealpha and
[png -- the last of which carries a whole PNG in the expression, base64, and
is written out beside the composed textures under a hash of its own bytes.
That is every modifier the installed games were seen to use. A modifier that is not
implemented is logged once with an example expression when the registry is
built, because a node whose texture cannot be built is drawn as a placeholder
and nothing else says why. Sixteen of Luanti's named
colours are known, which is the wool and dye palette these expressions use;
everything else has to be written as #rgb or #rrggbbaa. An expression that
reaches something not implemented leaves the node without a texture, which
draws as the placeholder.

How the world sits: a buildat voxel and a Luanti node both occupy the cube
centred on their integer coordinate, so Luanti node coordinates are Urho3D
world coordinates one for one. A map block is 16^3 nodes and the mesher wants a
one-voxel border to cull faces against, so a block goes in as an 18^3 volume:
itself plus a slice off each of the six neighbours that have arrived. A
neighbour arriving makes the block's mesh out of date; until it does, there is
a seam. Packing a block's volume and handing it to the mesher costs the frame
about 3 ms on a 2013 workstation, of which the packing itself is a few hundred
microseconds; the meshing is on a worker thread. Four blocks a frame is the
limit for that reason.

What is done
------------
- The UDP transport, both directions, splits included
- Registering and logging in, and the peer id and protocol version handshake
- INIT2, and access denied messages
- CLIENT_READY once ITEMDEF and NODEDEF have arrived, which is what makes the
  server spawn the player, and then PLAYERPOS every 0.1 s
- Map blocks: BLOCKDATA at serialization version 29, acknowledged with
  GOTBLOCKS, which is what keeps the server sending more
- MOVE_PLAYER (where the server put us) and TIME_OF_DAY
- The terrain on screen: a scene node per map block, meshed by buildat's voxel
  mesher, dropped again once it is far enough away
- Mouse look and flying movement, with the blocks streaming in around the
  camera and dropped again behind it
- TIME_OF_DAY, through Luanti's own day/night curve and its sunlight colour,
  as the zone's ambient colour
- Per-node light, day and night, baked into the vertex colours, and the holes
  in a texture discarded rather than drawn
- ADDNODE and REMOVENODE, patched into the block and re-meshed
- Walking: the player's box against the node data, with gravity, jumping,
  sneaking, swimming, and flying and noclip as toggles
- TOCLIENT_MOVEMENT, so the speeds and the gravity are the game's own
- PLAYERPOS carries the speed and the keys, which is what the server's
  movement checks and its animations of the player go by
- NODEDEF, and a voxel registry built from it
- Texture modifiers, composed into PNGs beside the server's media and cached
  there between runs
- Tile overlays and node colours: a tile is drawn in its own colour when it
  has one and the node's otherwise, which is what makes a grass block's side
  plain dirt with a green edge on it
- The media: ANNOUNCE_MEDIA, REQUEST_MEDIA and MEDIA, cached on disk by name
  and checked against the sha1 the server announced
- ITEMDEF, including the tool capabilities, and TOCLIENT_INVENTORY
- Pointing: a ray marched through the node data, with the node outlined
  around its own selection box -- the node box when the definition gives no
  selection box, and the whole voxel when it gives neither -- turned with the
  node's param2 the same way its shape and its collision boxes are.
  simplified: a node whose selection is several boxes gets the one box around
  all of them, where Luanti draws each
- Digging: TOSERVER_INTERACT, with the dig time worked out from the node's
  groups against the capabilities of what the player is wielding -- which
  is what the server's own anticheat wants, since it refuses a dig that was
  finished sooner than it should have been
- Placing what is wielded, and the hotbar slot on the number keys
- Items a game defines as usable: the left button sends INTERACT_USE with
  whatever is pointed at, node or nothing, and digs nothing -- devtest's
  chest_of_everything:bag opens its own inventory that way and its apple is
  eaten. The right button pointed at nothing sends INTERACT_ACTIVATE
- Node shapes that are not cubes: node boxes as their boxes, plants, torches,
  fires, signs and rails as quads, .obj models as their own geometry, and a
  flowing liquid as a box with a lowered top, through a shape in the voxel
  registry that the mesher copies into the chunk
- Connected node boxes: a fence with its rails towards the fences and the
  walls of stone next to it, and a pane in a run
- Rails: which of the four tiles a rail wears and which way it is turned,
  out of what is next to it, and the ramp one climbing a step is
- Particles: ADD_PARTICLESPAWNER and DELETE_PARTICLESPAWNER, SPAWN_PARTICLE
  and the zstd batch of them a game sends a hundred at once in. A spawner is
  an Urho3D ParticleEmitter and a single particle is an emitter of one that
  fires once
- Chat, both ways, and the player's hit points and breath
- Leaving: the disconnect goes out when the client shuts down for any reason,
  not only when escape was pressed. A player who vanishes without saying so
  is kept by the server until it times out, and the next client to use that
  name is refused meanwhile
- PRIVILEGES, which is what lets the client say that flying was refused
  because the server did not grant it rather than leaving the player to
  wonder why they were pulled back
- Active objects: other players, mobs and dropped items, where the server
  says they are. Their textures are drawn without smoothing, like the voxel
  atlas's: a Luanti game's textures are pixel art and interpolating them is
  wrong at every size. An object whose visual is a mesh is drawn as that mesh --
  the .b3d and .obj readers the node meshes use, one geometry per material so
  each wears the texture the object gave for it -- in its rest pose, because
  the animation chunks are not read. A dropped node is a small cube of the
  node's six tiles, turning at the rate the object asked for, and everything
  else is a box wearing the object's first texture, which reads as the thing
  where nothing at all reads as nothing at all.

  An object's model is authored in Luanti's own scene units, where a node is
  ten across, and visual_size scales it in those; a node's "mesh" drawtype is
  authored one unit to the node instead. That tenth is the only difference
  between the two paths
- Pointing at an object: the same ray against the object's selection box,
  the nearest of the two winning, with its box outlined and its infotext or
  nametag shown. The left button hits it (INTERACT_START_DIGGING with the
  object pointed at, once per press and then no faster than the hit delay)
  and the right button runs the game's on_rightclick for it
- Dropping a stack: Q throws what is wielded, ctrl+Q one item of it, and a
  stack dragged out of a formspec's slots goes the same way
- The sky's colours, out of SET_SKY, as what the world fades into, and the
  sun and the moon wearing the textures the game gives them: the sky shader
  samples them inside the square each body covers, with the texture's own
  alpha as the coverage, so a sun drawn as a disc in a square image is a disc
  on the sky. A body the game gave no texture, or whose texture has not
  arrived, keeps the shader's own colour. simplified: the tonemaps and the
  sunrise texture are not drawn
- A hotbar and a health bar, out of the inventory and the hit points
- Formspecs: the inventory form, the ones the server shows, the ones a node
  carries in its metadata -- a chest, a furnace -- which are opened here
  rather than after a round trip to the server, the way Luanti's own client
  does it, with their fields going back as NODEMETA_FIELDS and their slots
  coming out of the node's own inventory; and the prepend in front of all of
  them. Item slots with the item's own image in them, labels,
  images, buttons and fields; clicking a slot picks a stack up and puts it
  down, which goes back as an inventory action, and clicking a button sends
  the form's fields. Detached inventories, which is what a creative list is.

Only serialization version 29 is read. It is what every current server writes;
older ones compress the pieces of a mapblock separately and the client says so
and gives up rather than carrying a second parser.

Formspecs: what a form asks for is mostly a texture in a box, so most of
formspec_ui.lua is a BorderImage at a position. The units are inventory slots
and how many pixels one of those is comes out of the screen size, the same way
Luanti works it out; before formspec version 2 the units were a slot plus its
spacing and a position had a fixed padding added, and both are implemented.
Implemented as well: fields that can be typed into, tabs, checkboxes, tables
and text lists, the styles a form asks for in its default state, tooltips
over a named element or an area, and taking half a stack or one item at a
time. Not implemented: scroll containers and scrollbars, dropdowns,
hypertext, the hovered and pressed states of a style, dragging a stack, and
drawing an item that places a node as the little cube Luanti draws rather
than as one of its tiles.

Node shapes: a node box is drawn as its boxes, and a plant, a torch, a fire, a
sign and a rail as quads, through VoxelDefinition.shape -- a list of quads per
voxel that buildat's mesher copies into the chunk's mesh, so a chunk full of
fences costs what a chunk of cubes costs. shapes.lua builds those quads and
the engine knows nothing about node boxes. A node whose draw type is a mesh
gets the quads of its model, read out of the .obj by objmesh.lua, and is drawn
from both sides because a node mesh is usually a shell whose inside is meant
to be seen.

A flowing liquid is a box with a lowered top, one voxel per level in param2
through the same (definition, param2) machinery a facedir uses. A liquid at
the top level keeps its cube, so a waterfall and the middle of a lake are
cubes whose shared faces are culled.

A liquid is blended rather than alpha masked, so its faces are not in the
chunk's own geometry at all: the voxel definition carries a "translucent"
flag, the mesher puts those faces in a second geometry on a child node of the
chunk, and res/VoxelUnlitAlpha.xml -- the same shader, with the cutoff
replaced by a blend, no depth writing and no culling -- draws it. Urho3D sorts
alpha drawables by distance, so the chunks' water sorts between chunks.
simplified: faces within one chunk's water are not sorted against each other;
per-triangle sorting or depth peeling is the upgrade path. It rarely shows,
because along any ray there is at most one water surface:

- Water culls against water. Each liquid family -- everything naming the same
  liquid source, so a water source and a flowing water are one family and lava
  is another -- gets an edge material of its own for its cubes, and a shape
  group of its own for its shapes. A shape's quad against a neighbour of the
  same group is a face inside a body of it, and is not drawn.
- The face between water and something opaque belongs to the opaque voxel:
  the lake bottom is drawn by the ground, not by the water over it, which is
  Luanti's rule that the more solid of two nodes owns the face between them.
  Without it every surface under water would be behind two blended layers.
- Culling is off rather than the quads being doubled: a blended quad drawn
  twice blends twice, and a doubled water surface reads as opaque. Off it is
  still there when the camera is under it.

And being under it: a node carries a post_effect_color, which Luanti paints
over the whole screen while the camera is inside that node. This draws it as
a panel in front of the world and behind the rest of the UI, so the water is
over the world and the sky and not over the hotbar. That colour is all the
protocol gives for being in a liquid -- there is no per-liquid fog in it --
and it is what makes water read as water from below rather than as a blue
window. simplified: post_effect_color_shaded, which dims the tint by the
light where the camera is, is not read.

The surface runs continuously from one level to the next rather than stepping
down: a liquid definition says where its surface stands inside the voxel, and
the mesher moves the top corners of the shape to the average of the surfaces
of the four columns that meet at each corner. That is Luanti's
getCornerLevel, with its two rules -- a column with the same liquid above it
is full to the top, and a corner two of the four columns leave empty drops to
the bottom, which is what thins out the edge of a spill. It is the one thing
in the voxel registry the mesher works out per voxel rather than per
definition.

A connected node box -- a fence, a wall, a pane in a run -- is drawn from the
boxes it has per direction. Which of them a voxel wants depends on its
neighbours, so it is the same shape pass that decides: each quad carries the
direction it belongs to, or "only when nothing connects" for the boxes a
lone pane stands as, and the mesher draws the ones whose direction is
connected.

A rail is the other shape that depends on its neighbours, and it depends on
them altogether rather than gaining a piece per direction: it is one quad
wearing one of four tiles -- straight, curved, junction, crossing -- turned
one of four ways, and which of those is Luanti's own table of the sixteen
masks of its four horizontal neighbours. So a rail definition carries a shape
per mask instead of one shape, and the mesher picks. Four more masks are the
rails that climb: a rail with one of its own a step up in some direction is a
ramp towards it, and its raised edge is one node above its flat edge so that
it meets the rail up there exactly. Rails connect by Luanti's
connect_to_raillike group rather than by connects_to, so each of those groups
is a family of its own.

What connects is what Luanti says, turned into something the mesher can test.
Luanti gives each node a list of the node *ids* it connects to; the mesher
has voxel ids and one word to test, so the client works out families once per
set of definitions -- two nodes are in the same family when exactly the same
definitions reach out to them, which makes every wood's fence one family and
every stone's wall another -- and a definition carries its own family and a
bit per family it reaches out to. Thirty-two families, which is several times
what a game with mods uses; a game with more gets the rest sharing the last
one, and says so in the log. A node that says so also reaches into any solid
neighbour, which is Luanti's connect_sides.

What that does not do yet: the disconnected_<direction> boxes, which are
rarer than the rest; the tags are not turned with a facedir, so a connected
node box that also faces a direction has its rails pointing the way they were
built; a node whose model is .b3d -- the chests and the shulkers -- falls back
to the box the game says a ray hits; and a turned node box's texture
coordinates are the whole tile rather than the part of it Luanti works out
from the box after the turn.

The client logs a counter line every two seconds -- blocks received,
commands waiting, and per channel what the reliable layer is holding -- so
that a session which loaded badly can be diagnosed from its log afterwards.
A stall behind an unacknowledged packet, a lost reliable packet with
everything queued behind it, and a server that simply sends little look
different in those numbers.

The light around a node change is worked out here, the way Luanti's own
client works it out: ADDNODE and REMOVENODE carry the new node's own light and
nothing about what is around it, so res/../light.lua takes away the light that
came from what changed and spreads what is left back in, once per light bank.

Luanti keeps two of those in param1 -- the light a node has when the sun is up
and the light it gets from sources alone -- and they differ in one rule only:
sunlight is the value 15, one more than any source can give, and it goes
straight down undimmed through anything that lets it. So a node that starts or
stops letting sunlight through takes the whole column below it with it.

Two things make this cheap enough to do in Lua. It only runs when the change
can move light at all -- when the light the node gives, or whether light passes
through it, differs from what was there -- so a rail replaced by air costs
nothing. And the writes are held until the flood is done and then go into each
block in one pass, because a block's light is a string and rebuilding it once
per node would be thousands of copies of four kilobytes. A placed or dug node
looks at a few dozen nodes; a change that opens a shaft to the sky looks at a
few hundred.

What the flood cannot finish -- a node in a block we do not have, or the
budget of six thousand nodes running out -- falls back to telling the server we
no longer have that block, which makes it send the block again with the light
it worked out itself. That is throttled: within three blocks of the camera,
eight a frame, twenty-four waiting at most, because asking for a block again
takes a send away from the map that has not arrived yet.

The HUD: a game puts its own things on the screen with HUDADD and changes
them one field at a time with HUDCHANGE, and this draws the images, the text
and the statbars among them -- which on the two games tested is nearly all of
them. Where an element goes is Luanti's own arithmetic: a position that is a
fraction of the screen, an alignment saying which side of that point the
element sits on, and an offset in pixels; an image's size is a multiple of
its own or a percentage of the screen; a statbar counts in halves, so an odd
value ends in half an icon cut on the side the icons march away from.

HUD_SET_FLAGS is the other half of it, and it matters more than it looks: a
game that draws its own hearts turns off the client's, and VoxeLibre does.
So the hotbar, the health bar, the crosshair and the chat this client draws
are all behind their flag. What a flag cannot do here is separate the hotbar
from the health bar, which are one element.

Sounds: a server names a sound *group* rather than a file -- a game ships
three recordings of a footstep as "step.1.ogg", "step.2.ogg" and "step.3.ogg"
and asks for "step" -- so the announced media is sorted into groups and one
of the group is played at random, which is what Luanti does. A sound at a
position is a node in the scene with a SoundSource3D on it and the listener
rides the camera; a local one is a plain SoundSource. A sound attached to an
object starts where the object is and follows it, which is what a mob's own
noises want. FADE_SOUND moves the gain by its step a second and a sound faded
to nothing stops.

What that does not do yet: PLAY_SOUND's start_time is ignored, because
seeking is not in the sandbox's SoundSource -- a game uses that for
background music a player rejoins in the middle of.

Particles are Urho3D's own emitters, and Luanti's description does not line
up with one field for field. Luanti gives, per field, a tween of a range: a
start range, an end range, and a way of moving between them over the
spawner's life. Urho3D gives one emitter box, one box of directions, one
constant force and one size range for the whole emitter. So the tween is
dropped -- the starting range is what the whole spawner runs at -- and so are
the bias inside a range, the collision flags, the glow, the drag, the jitter,
the bounce and the attractors.

One thing does not survive the trip and has to be worked out instead: Urho3D
takes a velocity as a direction and a speed and normalizes the direction, so
a range of velocity *vectors* goes over as the box the direction is picked
from plus the range of magnitudes that box holds (particles.speed_range).
Without the second half every particle leaves at one node a second whatever
the game asked for, which reads as all of them flying away from where they
started. The speed a particle gets is then independent of its direction,
which is the part that stays wrong: exact for a single particle, where the
box is one vector.

A particle's texture is animated the way a node's tile is -- a vertical strip
or a sheet -- and that becomes Urho3D's texture frames: the part of the image
each frame is and how many seconds into the particle's life it is shown from.
How many frames a strip holds comes out of the image's own shape against the
aspect the game gave, which is Luanti's arithmetic. Urho3D stops on the last
frame rather than looping, so the frames are laid out again and again until
the longest life the particle can have is covered, up to a cap.

Only protocol 42 and up, which is Luanti 5.6 and up: below that the tweens
are not on the wire and a spawner is dropped rather than read wrong. A
spawner attached to an object stays where the object was when it started, and
a batch beyond 128 live single particles is dropped rather than queued.

The clouds are a flat layer faked in the sky shader -- the view direction
divided by its own y, which is what makes them crowd towards the horizon --
rather than a layer at a height. So of what CLOUD_PARAMS says, the density
becomes how much of the sky they cover and the speed becomes how fast the
layer drifts, through a factor picked so that Luanti's own default drifts at
the rate the shader had baked in before a game could ask for anything: twice
the speed is twice as fast, and that is what the field is for. The height and
the thickness have nothing to become and are dropped. Drawing the real thing
-- a slab of cloud at a height, which the player can fly above and through --
is deliberately not done; see the plan.

The crack that grows over a node being dug is the client's own texture rather
than the game's -- no server sends one -- so res/crack_anylength.png is
Luanti's, and res/LICENSE says so. The strip is cut into frames by the same
[verticalframe modifier an animated tile uses, and how many frames there are
is worked out from the image's shape, which is what "anylength" in its name
means. Luanti draws the crack as a second layer on the node's own tiles;
here it is a cube just outside the voxel, so the crack around a stair is a
cube. One scene node per frame, enabled one at a time: a Material lives only
as long as something in the engine holds it, and a StaticModel that has been
handed one is such a thing.

Active objects: an object whose visual is one of Luanti's sprite kinds --
sprite, upright_sprite, item, wielditem -- is a billboard turned to the
camera about Y, and everything else is a box wearing the object's first
texture. The two item visuals put an item's name where a texture would be, so
a dropped item wears the picture an inventory would draw for it, which for a
node is the little isometric cube -- the same thing Luanti's wielditem comes
out as. An upright_sprite turns to the camera here where Luanti turns it with
the object's own yaw.

The field of view: TOCLIENT_FOV asks for one in degrees or as a multiple of
the client's own, over a transition time, which is what a game zooms with. It
does not change what the client tells the server its view is, so a zoomed-in
player is still sent the blocks a 72-degree view needs -- more than it wants,
never fewer.

What a node says about itself: a node's metadata can carry an "infotext",
which is how a game labels a chest, a sign or a machine, and it is drawn under
the chat while that node is pointed at -- where Luanti draws it, cut at six
lines like Luanti cuts it, and taken away with the rest of the HUD by F1.

Two more things a server says about the player: OVERRIDE_DAY_NIGHT_RATIO
fixes what the light is whatever the time is, which is how a game lights
another dimension -- the sun still goes where the time says, as it does in
Luanti -- and BUILDAT_LUANTI_FORCE_DAY still wins over it, because a scripted
run asked for daylight. PLAYER_SPEED is a push: an explosion, a jump pad,
being hit. It is added to the speed once and the physics then has it, so the
vertical part is what gravity works off and the horizontal part decays at
whatever the acceleration is.

The things in the sky: SET_SUN, SET_MOON, SET_STARS and CLOUD_PARAMS. How
wide the sun and the moon are drawn, how many stars there are and in what
colour, and how much of the sky the clouds cover are all uniforms the shader
takes rather than constants, so a game that turns the sun off or asks for ten
thousand stars gets that. What is not drawn is the textures a game can give
the sun and the moon, or the cloud height and speed: the shader draws a
square of its own colour and one layer of cloud at its own height.

What is next
------------
- What a mob really looks like: Luanti draws a mesh for one, and this draws a
  box wearing its first texture, because Urho3D reads none of the model
  formats Luanti's meshes come in. A box wearing a cow's texture reads as a
  cow. The meshes are .b3d.
- Animations, nametags and attachments of the active objects
- The HUD elements that are not images, text or statbars: a waypoint and an
  image waypoint want the camera to turn a world position into a screen one,
  a compass wants the yaw, a minimap wants a map, and an inventory element and
  a hotbar element want the slots this client already draws its own way
